docs/R.md, before:

# Running R scripts on a Cluster (clean & reproducible)

When launching R scripts on a computing cluster, it is highly recommended to run them in a clean environment to ensure reproducibility and avoid unexpected side effects caused by user-specific configurations. You have to:

1. Create `renv` environment 
2. Use --vanilla option 

## Organize your code:

```
my_project/
├── code/          		# R script directory
│   └── myscript.R
│   └── setup_env.R
├── data/          		# Raw data directory
│   └── data.csv
├── results/     			# Analysis results directory
├── renv/          		# renv directory
│   └── activate.R
│   └── library
│   └── local
├── renv.lock      		# Frozen dependencies
├── R/
│   └── dataExtraction.R
├── .Renviron     		# Local environment variables
├── .Rprofile        		# Starting session instructions
├── .gitignore 
└── README.md
```

## Use renv::init() to create clean environment and install necessary packages

`renv::init()` does several important things:   
1.	Creates the renv/ infrastructure in your project:  
    * Folder renv/ with configuration files  
    * Rprofile file that activates renv at start-up  
    * renv.lock file (empty at start)  
2.	Isolates the environment: creates a private package library for this project only.  
3.	Scans the existing code to automatically detect the packages used (via library(), require() ...)  
4.	Installs the detected packages in the project's private library (NOT all, unfortunatelly...)  

## How to
1. If you haven't already done so, go into the project's directory 
```bash
cd /path/to/my_project/
```

2. Create a setup_env.R file 
```bash
vim code/setup_env.R
```

At this step, you should already have made a list of the packages needed for the analyses. If you need to add packages during the analysis, simply edit this file and run it again in RStudio.

```R
# setup_env.R

cat("Setting up R environment...\n")

# 1. Install renv first (required before)
if (!requireNamespace("renv", quietly = TRUE)) {
    cat("Installing renv package...\n")
    install.packages("renv", repos = "https://cran.r-project.org/")
}

# 2. Initialize renv for this projet
cat("Initializing renv environment...\n")
renv::init()

# 3. List all necessary packages
required_packages <- c(
    "data.table",
    "ggplot2",
    "dplyr",
    "parallel",
    "BiocManager"			# For Bioconductor packages if necessary
)

# 4. CRAN packages management
cat("Installing CRAN packages...\n")
install.packages(required_packages)

# 5. Bioconductor packages management
if ("BiocManager" %in% required_packages) {
    cat("Installing Bioconductor packages...\n")
    BiocManager::install(c("DESeq2", "edgeR"))		# examples
}

# 6. Final snapshot - Freeze all
cat("Creating final snapshot...\n")
renv::snapshot()

# 7. Final checkup
cat("Setup completed. Session info:\n")
sessionInfo()
```

Save the file and quit vim by **pressing escape** and entering the following command :
```bash
:wq
```

3. Use interactive mode to setup the environment

```bash
srun -p fast -c 2 --pty bash -i
module load R/4.3.3
Rscript code/setup_env.R
```

4. the next move: analyzing data
When you create or open a R script in the project, either via a terminal or in RStudio ONDemand(if available), simply start it with your isolated environment:

`renv::activate()`

The previously versions of installed packages will then be available.
Don't forget to add to the end of your script: 

`renv::deactivate()`


## Use --vanilla to launch R scripts: avoid side-effects

The `--vanilla` option disables all user and system configuration files and avoids automatic workspace saving/loading. It is equivalent to:

```
--no-save: 		    don't save workspace 
--no-restore: 		don't restore workspace
--no-site-file: 	ignore system configuration files
--no-init-file: 	ignore .Rprofile
--no-environ: 		ignore .Renviron
```

This ensures that your script runs exactly the same way regardless of your personal `.Rprofile`, `.Renviron`, or any `.RData` file.
`--vanilla` does NOT manage versions of packages. That's why `renv` is necessary.

## Example in sbatch mode:
In your project directory, create a file in charge of cleaning the environment, restoring the created environment and running the R script: 

```bash
cd /path/to/your/directory/code/
vim my_script.R
```

```bash
#!/bin/bash
###################configuration slurm##############################
#SBATCH -A invalbo
#SBATCH --time=2-23:00:00
#SBATCH --job-name=phylogenetic_tree
#SBATCH -p long
#SBATCH -N 1
#SBATCH -n 1
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task 8
#SBATCH --mem=8G
#SBATCH --array 1-22
#SBATCH -o Cluster_logs/%x-%j-%N.out
#SBATCH -e Cluster_logs/%x-%j-%N.err
#SBATCH --mail-user=loic.talignani@ird.fr
#SBATCH --mail-type=FAIL
####################################################################

module load R/4.3.0

#Setup cleanup trap
cleanup() {
    echo "Cleaning up temporary files..."
    rm -rf $TMPDIR/R_session_*
    rm -rf /tmp/Rtmp*
}

trap cleanup EXIT

# Load module
module purge
module load R/4.3.3

# Set R environment variables
export TMPDIR=$SLURM_TMPDIR

# Navigate to working directory
cd $SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR

# Restore Renv THEN run R script
Rscript -e "renv::restore()"
Rscript my_script.R

# Cleanup R temporary directories
find /tmp -name "Rtmp*" -user $USER -exec -rm -rf {} +
```

Save the file and quit the editor (esc + :wq). 

To run the script, in the shell, just enter:

```bash
sbatch --vanilla my_script.R
```

if `--vanilla` is already in the bash script (ie: Rscript --vanilla my_script.R), just enter:

```bash
sbatch my_script.R
```
This opens a clean R session in the compute node with the specified resources.



## Example in srun mode:
1. Follow the procedure described previously. 
2. Ask for resources in interactive mode
```bash   
srun --pty --time=2:00:00 --mem=8G bash
```

3. Create a complete R script
   
4. Run the analysis file

```bash
srun --time=1:00:00 --mem=4G Rscript --vanilla my_script.R 
```

Commit message:

Added copy to clipboard function

docs/R.md, after:

# Running R scripts on a Cluster (clean & reproducible)

When launching R scripts on a computing cluster, it is highly recommended to run them in a clean environment to ensure reproducibility and avoid unexpected side effects caused by user-specific configurations. You have to:

1. Create `renv` environment 
2. Use --vanilla option 

## Organize your code:

```
my_project/
├── code/          		# R script directory
│   └── myscript.R
│   └── setup_env.R
├── data/          		# Raw data directory
│   └── data.csv
├── results/     			# Analysis results directory
├── renv/          		# renv directory
│   └── activate.R
│   └── library
│   └── local
├── renv.lock      		# Frozen dependencies
├── R/
│   └── dataExtraction.R
├── .Renviron     		# Local environment variables
├── .Rprofile        		# Starting session instructions
├── .gitignore 
└── README.md
```

## Use renv::init() to create clean environment and install necessary packages

`renv::init()` does several important things:   
1.	Creates the renv/ infrastructure in your project:  
    * Folder renv/ with configuration files  
    * Rprofile file that activates renv at start-up  
    * renv.lock file (empty at start)  
2.	Isolates the environment: creates a private package library for this project only.  
3.	Scans the existing code to automatically detect the packages used (via library(), require() ...)  
4.	Installs the detected packages in the project's private library (NOT all, unfortunatelly...)  

## How to
1. If you haven't already done so, go into the project's directory 
```bash
cd /path/to/my_project/
```

2. Create a setup_env.R file 
```bash
vim code/setup_env.R
```
```R
# setup_env.R

cat("Setting up R environment...\n")

# 1. Install renv first (required before)
if (!requireNamespace("renv", quietly = TRUE)) {
    cat("Installing renv package...\n")
    install.packages("renv", repos = "https://cran.r-project.org/")
}

# 2. Initialize renv for this projet
cat("Initializing renv environment...\n")
renv::init()

# 3. List all necessary packages
required_packages <- c(
    "data.table",
    "ggplot2",
    "dplyr",
    "parallel",
    "BiocManager"			# For Bioconductor packages if necessary
)

# 4. CRAN packages management
cat("Installing CRAN packages...\n")
install.packages(required_packages)

# 5. Bioconductor packages management
if ("BiocManager" %in% required_packages) {
    cat("Installing Bioconductor packages...\n")
    BiocManager::install(c("DESeq2", "edgeR"))		# examples
}

# 6. Final snapshot - Freeze all
cat("Creating final snapshot...\n")
renv::snapshot()

# 7. Final checkup
cat("Setup completed. Session info:\n")
sessionInfo()
```
Save the file and quit vim by **pressing escape** and entering the following command :
```bash
:wq
```
At this step, you should already have made a list of the packages needed for the analyses. If you need to add packages during the analysis, simply edit this file and run it again.

3. Use interactive mode to setup the environment

```bash
srun -p fast -c 2 --pty bash -i
module load R/4.3.3
Rscript code/setup_env.R
```
4. The next move: analyzing data
   
When you create or open a R script in the project, either via a terminal or in RStudio ONDemand(if available), simply start it with your isolated environment:
```R
renv::activate()
```
The previously versions of installed packages will then be available.
Don't forget to add to the end of your script: 
```R
renv::deactivate()
```
In a bash script, you can also use
```R
renv::restore()
```
if you already have created the `renv`. This function just recall the R environment present in the project directory.

## Use --vanilla to launch R scripts: avoid side-effects

The `--vanilla` option disables all user and system configuration files and avoids automatic workspace saving/loading. It is equivalent to:

```
--no-save: 		    don't save workspace 
--no-restore: 		don't restore workspace
--no-site-file: 	ignore system configuration files
--no-init-file: 	ignore .Rprofile
--no-environ: 		ignore .Renviron
```

This ensures that your script runs exactly the same way regardless of your personal `.Rprofile`, `.Renviron`, or any `.RData` file.
`--vanilla` does NOT manage versions of packages. That's why `renv` is necessary.

## Example in sbatch mode:
In your project directory, create a file in charge of cleaning the environment, restoring the created environment and running the R script: 

```bash
cd /path/to/your/directory/code/
vim my_script.R
```

```bash
#!/bin/bash
###################configuration slurm##############################
#SBATCH -A invalbo
#SBATCH --time=2-23:00:00
#SBATCH --job-name=phylogenetic_tree
#SBATCH -p long
#SBATCH -N 1
#SBATCH -n 1
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task 8
#SBATCH --mem=8G
#SBATCH --array 1-22
#SBATCH -o Cluster_logs/%x-%j-%N.out
#SBATCH -e Cluster_logs/%x-%j-%N.err
#SBATCH --mail-user=loic.talignani@ird.fr
#SBATCH --mail-type=FAIL
####################################################################

module load R/4.3.0

#Setup cleanup trap
cleanup() {
    echo "Cleaning up temporary files..."
    rm -rf $TMPDIR/R_session_*
    rm -rf /tmp/Rtmp*
}

trap cleanup EXIT

# Load module
module purge
module load R/4.3.3

# Set R environment variables
export TMPDIR=$SLURM_TMPDIR

# Navigate to working directory
cd $SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR

# Restore Renv THEN run R script
Rscript -e "renv::restore()"
Rscript my_script.R

# Cleanup R temporary directories
find /tmp -name "Rtmp*" -user $USER -exec -rm -rf {} +
```

Save the file and quit the editor (esc + :wq). 

To run the script, just type the following command:

```bash
sbatch --vanilla my_script.R
```

if `--vanilla` is already in the bash script (ie: Rscript --vanilla my_script.R), just type:

```bash
sbatch my_script.R
```
This opens a clean R session in the compute node with the specified resources.



## Example in srun mode:
1. Follow the procedure described previously. 
2. Ask for resources in interactive mode
```bash   
srun --pty --time=2:00:00 --mem=8G bash
```

3. Create a complete R script
   
4. Run the analysis file

```bash
srun --time=1:00:00 --mem=4G Rscript --vanilla my_script.R 
```
